you
think of all the food made in the world
each year hard to picture then imagine
that you are all of humanity and on a
plate in front of you is the one lovely
annual meal you make for yourself you
did all sorts of work putting that meal
on your table you must be eager to
consume the fruits of your labor and the
vegetables and meats and waffles of your
labor too right well oddly enough a
third of that meal ends up in the trash
a third of the food we eat globally an
estimated 1.3 billion tons ends up as
waste all the work we put into producing
that food is wasted and what's worse it
costs us America alone spends an
estimated one hundred and sixty five
billion dollars a year managing food
waste
we're wasting food energy and money
perhaps worst of all we're wasting the
chance to change to make the system of
food consumption more efficient if you
want to bring on that change you should
know about a humble yet diligent and
ever so crucial ally the worm worms
convert organic waste and other
compostable products into natural
fertilizers up to 75% of what we put in
the waste stream can become food and
bedding material for vermicompost you
can create a worm bin in your own home
to see the composting process in action
first off you need worms and not your
typical earthworms you need red worms
ice any ax foet EDA the species
responsible for most vermicompost Inge
in North America
these red wigglers are surface dwellers
who don't burrow too deep their optimal
feeders around room temperature and
they're well-suited to converting
organic waste into usable fertilizer now
your worms might be vermin but they need
a comfortable space to live and work
some bedding material either shredded
paper or cardboard some moisture and of
course food namely your leftovers
slightly decomposed table scraps
the worms break down food waste and
other organic matter into castings a
fancy synonym for worm poop their
excrement is absolutely teeming with
microbes which continue the
decomposition process
making all those once wasted nutrients
available again as fertilizer the
timeline for the whole process varies
depending on the quantity of worms the
temperature and how much waste is added
to the bin and there's another timeline
to consider in a healthy worm bin
habitat worm reproduction will occur
when the wiggler's become sexually
mature indicated by an elongation of the
segments into a bulbous structure
three-month-old wigglers can produce two
to three semi translucent yellow worm
cocoons a week you thought only moths
and butterflies come out of cocoons well
we can't all be majestic it takes around
eleven weeks for new babies to hatch
when your bin seems to be full of living
vermicelli noodles it's time to share
the bounty with your friends and start a
vermicompost Club or keep those worms to
yourself and start a business
Verma composting isn't confined only to
small worm bins it's an emerging
entrepreneurial enterprise large scale
facilities convert bulk organic waste
and even manure into rich black castings
called black gold its value as a soil
additive is unparalleled and it can help
plants resist harmful pathogens the lack
of available land in urban environments
coupled with growing interest in smaller
scale farming means there's a market for
vermicompost a many communities use
composting as part of zero waste
strategies and they can sell their
worm-eaten table scraps to local farms
hungry for rich fertilizer so instead of
wasting money dumping wasted food in
landfills we can remake waste into an
asset putting it back into our food
system to make it more sustainable all
with the help of the humble worm the
tiny organism that can help us change
the way we look at foods place in our
lives and our place in the world as long
as we give the little guy a place at our
table well not an actual seat at the
table a bin in the shed is fine
you